README.md, before:

[![Build Status](https://github.com/ThingPulse/esp8266-oled-ssd1306/actions/workflows/main.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ThingPulse/esp8266-oled-ssd1306/actions)

# ThingPulse OLED SSD1306 (ESP8266/ESP32/Mbed-OS)

This is a driver for SSD1306 128x64, 128x32, 64x48 and 64x32 OLED displays running on the Arduino/ESP8266 & ESP32 and mbed-os platforms.
Can be used with either the I2C or SPI version of the display.

This library drives the OLED display included in the [ThingPulse IoT starter kit](https://thingpulse.com/product/esp8266-iot-electronics-starter-kit-weatherstation-planespotter-worldclock/) aka classic kit aka weather station kit.

[![ThingPulse ESP8266 WeatherStation Classic Kit](https://github.com/ThingPulse/esp8266-weather-station/blob/master/resources/ThingPulse-ESP8266-Weather-Station.jpeg?raw=true)](https://thingpulse.com/product/esp8266-iot-electronics-starter-kit-weatherstation-planespotter-worldclock/)

You can either download this library as a zip file and unpack it to your Arduino/libraries folder or find it in the Arduino library manager under "ESP8266 and ESP32 Oled Driver for SSD1306 display". For mbed-os a copy of the files are available as an mbed-os library.

It is also available as a [PlatformIO library](https://platformio.org/lib/show/2978/ESP8266%20and%20ESP32%20OLED%20driver%20for%20SSD1306%20displays/examples). Just execute the following command:
```
platformio lib install 2978
```

## Service level promise

<table><tr><td><img src="https://thingpulse.com/assets/ThingPulse-open-source-prime.png" width="150">
</td><td>This is a ThingPulse <em>prime</em> project. See our <a href="https://thingpulse.com/about/open-source-commitment/">open-source commitment declaration</a> for what this means.</td></tr></table>

## Credits

This library has initially been written by [Daniel Eichhorn](https://github.com/squix78). Many thanks go to [Fabrice Weinberg](https://github.com/FWeinb) for optimizing and refactoring many aspects of the library. Also many thanks to the many committers who helped to add new features and who fixed many bugs. Mbed-OS support and other improvements were contributed by [Helmut Tschemernjak](https://github.com/helmut64).

The init sequence for the SSD1306 was inspired by Adafruit's library for the same display.

## mbed-os
This library has been adopted to support the ARM mbed-os environment. A copy of this library is available in mbed-os under the name OLED_SSD1306 by Helmut Tschemernjak. An alternate installation option is to copy the following files into your mbed-os project: OLEDDisplay.cpp OLEDDisplay.h OLEDDisplayFonts.h OLEDDisplayUi.cpp OLEDDisplayUi.h SSD1306I2C.h

## Usage

Check out the examples folder for a few comprehensive demonstrations how to use the library. Also check out the [ESP8266 Weather Station](https://github.com/ThingPulse/esp8266-weather-station) library which uses the OLED library to display beautiful weather information.

## Upgrade

The API changed a lot with the 3.0 release. If you were using this library with older versions please have a look at the [Upgrade Guide](UPGRADE-3.0.md).

Going from 3.x version to 4.0 a lot of internals changed and compatibility for more displays was added. Please read the [Upgrade Guide](UPGRADE-4.0.md).

## Features

* Draw pixels at given coordinates
* Draw lines from given coordinates to given coordinates
* Draw or fill a rectangle with given dimensions
* Draw Text at given coordinates:
 * Define Alignment: Left, Right and Center
 * Set the Fontface you want to use (see section Fonts below)
 * Limit the width of the text by an amount of pixels. Before this widths will be reached, the renderer will wrap the text to a new line if possible
* Display content in automatically side scrolling carousel
 * Define transition cycles
 * Define how long one frame will be displayed
 * Draw the different frames in callback methods
 * One indicator per frame will be automatically displayed. The active frame will be displayed from inactive once

## Fonts

Fonts are defined in a proprietary but open format. You can create new font files by choosing from a given list
of open sourced Fonts from this web app: http://oleddisplay.squix.ch
Choose the font family, style and size, check the preview image and if you like what you see click the "Create" button. This will create the font array in a text area form where you can copy and paste it into a new or existing header file.


![FontTool](https://github.com/squix78/esp8266-oled-ssd1306/raw/master/resources/FontTool.png)

## Hardware Abstraction

The library supports different protocols to access the OLED display. Currently there is support for I2C using the built in Wire.h library, I2C by using the much faster [BRZO I2C library](https://github.com/pasko-zh/brzo_i2c) written in assembler and it also supports displays which come with the SPI interface.

### I2C with Wire.h

```C++
#include <Wire.h>
#include "SSD1306Wire.h"

// for 128x64 displays:
SSD1306Wire display(0x3c, SDA, SCL);  // ADDRESS, SDA, SCL
// for 128x32 displays:
// SSD1306Wire display(0x3c, SDA, SCL, GEOMETRY_128_32);  // ADDRESS, SDA, SCL, GEOMETRY_128_32 (or 128_64)
// for using 2nd Hardware I2C (if available)
// SSD1306Wire(0x3c, SDA, SCL, GEOMETRY_128_64, I2C_TWO); //default value is I2C_ONE if not mentioned
// By default SD1306Wire set I2C frequency to 700000, you can use set either another frequency or skip setting the frequency by providing -1 value
// SSD1306Wire(0x3c, SDA, SCL, GEOMETRY_128_64, I2C_ONE, 400000); //set I2C frequency to 400kHz
// SSD1306Wire(0x3c, SDA, SCL, GEOMETRY_128_64, I2C_ONE, -1); //skip setting the I2C bus frequency
```

for a SH1106:
```C++
#include <Wire.h>
#include "SH1106Wire.h"

SH1106Wire display(0x3c, SDA, SCL);  // ADDRESS, SDA, SCL
// By default SH1106Wire set I2C frequency to 700000, you can use set either another frequency or skip setting the frequency by providing -1 value
// SH1106Wire(0x3c, SDA, SCL, GEOMETRY_128_64, I2C_ONE, 400000); //set I2C frequency to 400kHz
// SH1106Wire(0x3c, SDA, SCL, GEOMETRY_128_64, I2C_ONE, -1); //skip setting the I2C bus frequency
```

### I2C with brzo_i2c

```C++
#include <brzo_i2c.h>
#include "SSD1306Brzo.h"

SSD1306Brzo display(0x3c, SDA, SCL);  // ADDRESS, SDA, SCL
```
or for the SH1106:
```C++
#include <brzo_i2c.h>
#include "SH1106Brzo.h"

SH1106Brzo display(0x3c, SDA, SCL);  // ADDRESS, SDA, SCL
```

### SPI

```C++
#include <SPI.h>
#include "SSD1306Spi.h"

SSD1306Spi display(D0, D2, D8);  // RES, DC, CS
```
or for the SH1106:
```C++
#include <SPI.h>
#include "SH1106Spi.h"

SH1106Spi display(D0, D2, CS);  // RES, DC, CS
```

In case the CS pin is not used (hard wired to ground), pass CS as -1.

## API

### Display Control

```C++
// Initialize the display
void init();

// Free the memory used by the display
void end();

// Cycle through the initialization
void resetDisplay(void);

// Connect again to the display through I2C
void reconnect(void);

// Turn the display on
void displayOn(void);

// Turn the display offs
void displayOff(void);

// Clear the local pixel buffer
void clear(void);

// Write the buffer to the display memory
void display(void);

// Inverted display mode
void invertDisplay(void);

// Normal display mode
void normalDisplay(void);

// Set display contrast
// really low brightness & contrast: contrast = 10, precharge = 5, comdetect = 0
// normal brightness & contrast:  contrast = 100
void setContrast(uint8_t contrast, uint8_t precharge = 241, uint8_t comdetect = 64);

// Convenience method to access
void setBrightness(uint8_t);

// Turn the display upside down
void flipScreenVertically();

// Draw the screen mirrored
void mirrorScreen();
```

## Pixel drawing

```C++

/* Drawing functions */
// Sets the color of all pixel operations
// color : BLACK, WHITE, INVERSE
void setColor(OLEDDISPLAY_COLOR color);

// Draw a pixel at given position
void setPixel(int16_t x, int16_t y);

// Draw a line from position 0 to position 1
void drawLine(int16_t x0, int16_t y0, int16_t x1, int16_t y1);

// Draw the border of a rectangle at the given location
void drawRect(int16_t x, int16_t y, int16_t width, int16_t height);

// Fill the rectangle
void fillRect(int16_t x, int16_t y, int16_t width, int16_t height);

// Draw the border of a circle
void drawCircle(int16_t x, int16_t y, int16_t radius);

// Fill circle
void fillCircle(int16_t x, int16_t y, int16_t radius);

// Draw an empty triangle i.e. only the outline
void drawTriangle(int16_t x0, int16_t y0, int16_t x1, int16_t y1, int16_t x2, int16_t y2);

// Draw a solid triangle i.e. filled
void fillTriangle(int16_t x0, int16_t y0, int16_t x1, int16_t y1, int16_t x2, int16_t y2);

// Draw a line horizontally
void drawHorizontalLine(int16_t x, int16_t y, int16_t length);

// Draw a lin vertically
void drawVerticalLine(int16_t x, int16_t y, int16_t length);

// Draws a rounded progress bar with the outer dimensions given by width and height. Progress is
// a unsigned byte value between 0 and 100
void drawProgressBar(uint16_t x, uint16_t y, uint16_t width, uint16_t height, uint8_t progress);

// Draw a bitmap in the internal image format
void drawFastImage(int16_t x, int16_t y, int16_t width, int16_t height, const uint8_t *image);

// Draw a XBM
void drawXbm(int16_t x, int16_t y, int16_t width, int16_t height, const uint8_t *xbm);
```

## Text operations

``` C++
// Draws a string at the given location, returns how many chars have been written
uint16_t drawString(int16_t x, int16_t y, const String &text);

// Draws a String with a maximum width at the given location.
// If the given String is wider than the specified width
// The text will be wrapped to the next line at a space or dash
// returns 0 if everything fits on the screen or the numbers of characters in the
// first line if not
uint16_t drawStringMaxWidth(int16_t x, int16_t y, uint16_t maxLineWidth, const String &text);

// Returns the width of the const char* with the current
// font settings
uint16_t getStringWidth(const char* text, uint16_t length, bool utf8 = false);

// Convencience method for the const char version
uint16_t getStringWidth(const String &text);

// Specifies relative to which anchor point
// the text is rendered. Available constants:
// TEXT_ALIGN_LEFT, TEXT_ALIGN_CENTER, TEXT_ALIGN_RIGHT, TEXT_ALIGN_CENTER_BOTH
void setTextAlignment(OLEDDISPLAY_TEXT_ALIGNMENT textAlignment);

// Sets the current font. Available default fonts
// ArialMT_Plain_10, ArialMT_Plain_16, ArialMT_Plain_24
// Or create one with the font tool at http://oleddisplay.squix.ch
void setFont(const uint8_t* fontData);
```

## Ui Library (OLEDDisplayUi)

The Ui Library is used to provide a basic set of user interface elements called `Frames` and `Overlays`. A `Frame` is used to provide
information to the user. The default behaviour is to display a `Frame` for a defined time and than move to the next `Frame`. The library also
provides an `Indicator` element that will be updated accordingly. An `Overlay` on the other hand is a piece of information (e.g. a clock) that
is always displayed at the same position.

```C++
/**
 * Initialise the display
 */
void init();

/**
 * Configure the internal used target FPS
 */
void setTargetFPS(uint8_t fps);

/**
 * Enable automatic transition to next frame after the some time can be configured with
 * `setTimePerFrame` and `setTimePerTransition`.
 */
void enableAutoTransition();

/**
 * Disable automatic transition to next frame.
 */
void disableAutoTransition();

/**
 * Set the direction if the automatic transitioning
 */
void setAutoTransitionForwards();
void setAutoTransitionBackwards();

/**
 *  Set the approx. time a frame is displayed
 */
void setTimePerFrame(uint16_t time);

/**
 * Set the approx. time a transition will take
 */
void setTimePerTransition(uint16_t time);

/**
 * Draw the indicator.
 * This is the default state for all frames if
 * the indicator was hidden on the previous frame
 * it will be slided in.
 */
void enableIndicator();

/**
 * Don't draw the indicator.
 * This will slide out the indicator
 * when transitioning to the next frame.
 */
void disableIndicator();

/**
 * Enable drawing of all indicators.
 */
void enableAllIndicators();

/**
 * Disable drawing of all indicators.
 */
void disableAllIndicators();

/**
 * Set the position of the indicator bar.
 */
void setIndicatorPosition(IndicatorPosition pos);

/**
 * Set the direction of the indicator bar. Defining the order of frames ASCENDING / DESCENDING
 */
void setIndicatorDirection(IndicatorDirection dir);

/**
 * Set the symbol to indicate an active frame in the indicator bar.
 */
void setActiveSymbol(const uint8_t* symbol);

/**
 * Set the symbol to indicate an inactive frame in the indicator bar.
 */
void setInactiveSymbol(const uint8_t* symbol);

/**
 * Configure what animation is used to transition from one frame to another
 */
void setFrameAnimation(AnimationDirection dir);

/**
 * Add frame drawing functions
 */
void setFrames(FrameCallback* frameFunctions, uint8_t frameCount);

/**
 * Add overlays drawing functions that are draw independent of the Frames
 */
void setOverlays(OverlayCallback* overlayFunctions, uint8_t overlayCount);

/**
 * Set the function that will draw each step
 * in the loading animation
 */
void setLoadingDrawFunction(LoadingDrawFunction loadingDrawFunction);

/**
 * Run the loading process
 */
void runLoadingProcess(LoadingStage* stages, uint8_t stagesCount);

// Manual control
void nextFrame();
void previousFrame();

/**
 * Switch without transition to frame `frame`.
 */
void switchToFrame(uint8_t frame);

/**
 * Transition to frame `frame`. When the `frame` number is bigger than the current
 * frame the forward animation will be used, otherwise the backwards animation is used.
 */
void transitionToFrame(uint8_t frame);

// State Info
OLEDDisplayUiState* getUiState();

// This needs to be called in the main loop
// the returned value is the remaining time (in ms)
// you have to draw after drawing to keep the frame budget.
int8_t update();
```

## Example: SSD1306Demo

### Frame 1
![DemoFrame1](https://github.com/squix78/esp8266-oled-ssd1306/raw/master/resources/DemoFrame1.jpg)

This frame shows three things:
 * How to draw an XMB image
 * How to draw static text which is not moved by the frame transition
 * The active/inactive frame indicators

### Frame 2
![DemoFrame2](https://github.com/squix78/esp8266-oled-ssd1306/raw/master/resources/DemoFrame2.jpg)

Currently there are one fontface with three sizes included in the library: Arial 10, 16 and 24. Once the converter is published you will be able to convert any ttf font into the used format.

### Frame 3

![DemoFrame3](https://github.com/squix78/esp8266-oled-ssd1306/raw/master/resources/DemoFrame3.jpg)

This frame demonstrates the text alignment. The coordinates in the frame show relative to which position the texts have been rendered.

### Frame 4

![DemoFrame4](https://github.com/squix78/esp8266-oled-ssd1306/raw/master/resources/DemoFrame4.jpg)

This shows how to use define a maximum width after which the driver automatically wraps a word to the next line. This comes in very handy if you have longer texts to display.

### SPI version

![SPIVersion](https://github.com/neptune2/esp8266-oled-ssd1306/raw/master/resources/SPI_version.jpg)

This shows the code working on the SPI version of the display. See demo code for ESP8266 pins used.

## Selection of projects using this library

 * [QRCode ESP8266](https://github.com/anunpanya/ESP8266_QRcode) (by @anunpanya)
 * [Scan I2C](https://github.com/hallard/Scan-I2C-WiFi) (by @hallard)
 * [ThingPulse Weather Station](https://github.com/ThingPulse/esp8266-weather-station)
 * [Meshtastic](https://www.meshtastic.org/) - an open source GPS communicator mesh radio
 * Yours?

Commit message:

Reduced library in size to fit smaller devices

README.md, after:

[![Build Status](https://github.com/ThingPulse/esp8266-oled-ssd1306/actions/workflows/main.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/ThingPulse/esp8266-oled-ssd1306/actions)

# Cutdown version - Why Modified
This is a very cutdown version of the excellent ThingPulse library for a project I was working on with very limited programming space left.

It will compile and work now on a Leonardo or Arduino UNO now as well as the larger ESP etc.

Please see the original project (mentioned in this readme) for examples, updates and communications other than I2C.

Items removed are examples, fonts, sample images and communications other than I2C (SCL,SDA connections).

To use - dont install as library - just add the 3 files (OLEDisplay.cpp, OLEDisplay.h, SDD1306Wire.h) to the same folder as the .ino.

See sample MainSimpleDemo.ino

Ambrose 2023


# ThingPulse OLED SSD1306 (ESP8266/ESP32/Mbed-OS)

This is a driver for SSD1306 128x64, 128x32, 64x48 and 64x32 OLED displays running on the Arduino/ESP8266 & ESP32 and mbed-os platforms.
Can be used with either the I2C or SPI version of the display.

This library drives the OLED display included in the [ThingPulse IoT starter kit](https://thingpulse.com/product/esp8266-iot-electronics-starter-kit-weatherstation-planespotter-worldclock/) aka classic kit aka weather station kit.

[![ThingPulse ESP8266 WeatherStation Classic Kit](https://github.com/ThingPulse/esp8266-weather-station/blob/master/resources/ThingPulse-ESP8266-Weather-Station.jpeg?raw=true)](https://thingpulse.com/product/esp8266-iot-electronics-starter-kit-weatherstation-planespotter-worldclock/)

You can either download this library as a zip file and unpack it to your Arduino/libraries folder or find it in the Arduino library manager under "ESP8266 and ESP32 Oled Driver for SSD1306 display". For mbed-os a copy of the files are available as an mbed-os library.

It is also available as a [PlatformIO library](https://platformio.org/lib/show/2978/ESP8266%20and%20ESP32%20OLED%20driver%20for%20SSD1306%20displays/examples). Just execute the following command:
```
platformio lib install 2978
```

## Service level promise

<table><tr><td><img src="https://thingpulse.com/assets/ThingPulse-open-source-prime.png" width="150">
</td><td>This is a ThingPulse <em>prime</em> project. See our <a href="https://thingpulse.com/about/open-source-commitment/">open-source commitment declaration</a> for what this means.</td></tr></table>

## Credits

This library has initially been written by [Daniel Eichhorn](https://github.com/squix78). Many thanks go to [Fabrice Weinberg](https://github.com/FWeinb) for optimizing and refactoring many aspects of the library. Also many thanks to the many committers who helped to add new features and who fixed many bugs. Mbed-OS support and other improvements were contributed by [Helmut Tschemernjak](https://github.com/helmut64).

The init sequence for the SSD1306 was inspired by Adafruit's library for the same display.

## mbed-os
This library has been adopted to support the ARM mbed-os environment. A copy of this library is available in mbed-os under the name OLED_SSD1306 by Helmut Tschemernjak. An alternate installation option is to copy the following files into your mbed-os project: OLEDDisplay.cpp OLEDDisplay.h OLEDDisplayFonts.h OLEDDisplayUi.cpp OLEDDisplayUi.h SSD1306I2C.h

## Usage

Check out the examples folder for a few comprehensive demonstrations how to use the library. Also check out the [ESP8266 Weather Station](https://github.com/ThingPulse/esp8266-weather-station) library which uses the OLED library to display beautiful weather information.

## Upgrade

The API changed a lot with the 3.0 release. If you were using this library with older versions please have a look at the [Upgrade Guide](UPGRADE-3.0.md).

Going from 3.x version to 4.0 a lot of internals changed and compatibility for more displays was added. Please read the [Upgrade Guide](UPGRADE-4.0.md).

## Features

* Draw pixels at given coordinates
* Draw lines from given coordinates to given coordinates
* Draw or fill a rectangle with given dimensions
* Draw Text at given coordinates:
 * Define Alignment: Left, Right and Center
 * Set the Fontface you want to use (see section Fonts below)
 * Limit the width of the text by an amount of pixels. Before this widths will be reached, the renderer will wrap the text to a new line if possible
* Display content in automatically side scrolling carousel
 * Define transition cycles
 * Define how long one frame will be displayed
 * Draw the different frames in callback methods
 * One indicator per frame will be automatically displayed. The active frame will be displayed from inactive once

## Fonts

Fonts are defined in a proprietary but open format. You can create new font files by choosing from a given list
of open sourced Fonts from this web app: http://oleddisplay.squix.ch
Choose the font family, style and size, check the preview image and if you like what you see click the "Create" button. This will create the font array in a text area form where you can copy and paste it into a new or existing header file.


![FontTool](https://github.com/squix78/esp8266-oled-ssd1306/raw/master/resources/FontTool.png)

## Hardware Abstraction

The library supports different protocols to access the OLED display. Currently there is support for I2C using the built in Wire.h library, I2C by using the much faster [BRZO I2C library](https://github.com/pasko-zh/brzo_i2c) written in assembler and it also supports displays which come with the SPI interface.

### I2C with Wire.h

```C++
#include <Wire.h>
#include "SSD1306Wire.h"

// for 128x64 displays:
SSD1306Wire display(0x3c, SDA, SCL);  // ADDRESS, SDA, SCL
// for 128x32 displays:
// SSD1306Wire display(0x3c, SDA, SCL, GEOMETRY_128_32);  // ADDRESS, SDA, SCL, GEOMETRY_128_32 (or 128_64)
// for using 2nd Hardware I2C (if available)
// SSD1306Wire(0x3c, SDA, SCL, GEOMETRY_128_64, I2C_TWO); //default value is I2C_ONE if not mentioned
// By default SD1306Wire set I2C frequency to 700000, you can use set either another frequency or skip setting the frequency by providing -1 value
// SSD1306Wire(0x3c, SDA, SCL, GEOMETRY_128_64, I2C_ONE, 400000); //set I2C frequency to 400kHz
// SSD1306Wire(0x3c, SDA, SCL, GEOMETRY_128_64, I2C_ONE, -1); //skip setting the I2C bus frequency
```

for a SH1106:
```C++
#include <Wire.h>
#include "SH1106Wire.h"

SH1106Wire display(0x3c, SDA, SCL);  // ADDRESS, SDA, SCL
// By default SH1106Wire set I2C frequency to 700000, you can use set either another frequency or skip setting the frequency by providing -1 value
// SH1106Wire(0x3c, SDA, SCL, GEOMETRY_128_64, I2C_ONE, 400000); //set I2C frequency to 400kHz
// SH1106Wire(0x3c, SDA, SCL, GEOMETRY_128_64, I2C_ONE, -1); //skip setting the I2C bus frequency
```

### I2C with brzo_i2c

```C++
#include <brzo_i2c.h>
#include "SSD1306Brzo.h"

SSD1306Brzo display(0x3c, SDA, SCL);  // ADDRESS, SDA, SCL
```
or for the SH1106:
```C++
#include <brzo_i2c.h>
#include "SH1106Brzo.h"

SH1106Brzo display(0x3c, SDA, SCL);  // ADDRESS, SDA, SCL
```

### SPI

```C++
#include <SPI.h>
#include "SSD1306Spi.h"

SSD1306Spi display(D0, D2, D8);  // RES, DC, CS
```
or for the SH1106:
```C++
#include <SPI.h>
#include "SH1106Spi.h"

SH1106Spi display(D0, D2, CS);  // RES, DC, CS
```

In case the CS pin is not used (hard wired to ground), pass CS as -1.

## API

### Display Control

```C++
// Initialize the display
void init();

// Free the memory used by the display
void end();

// Cycle through the initialization
void resetDisplay(void);

// Connect again to the display through I2C
void reconnect(void);

// Turn the display on
void displayOn(void);

// Turn the display offs
void displayOff(void);

// Clear the local pixel buffer
void clear(void);

// Write the buffer to the display memory
void display(void);

// Inverted display mode
void invertDisplay(void);

// Normal display mode
void normalDisplay(void);

// Set display contrast
// really low brightness & contrast: contrast = 10, precharge = 5, comdetect = 0
// normal brightness & contrast:  contrast = 100
void setContrast(uint8_t contrast, uint8_t precharge = 241, uint8_t comdetect = 64);

// Convenience method to access
void setBrightness(uint8_t);

// Turn the display upside down
void flipScreenVertically();

// Draw the screen mirrored
void mirrorScreen();
```

## Pixel drawing

```C++

/* Drawing functions */
// Sets the color of all pixel operations
// color : BLACK, WHITE, INVERSE
void setColor(OLEDDISPLAY_COLOR color);

// Draw a pixel at given position
void setPixel(int16_t x, int16_t y);

// Draw a line from position 0 to position 1
void drawLine(int16_t x0, int16_t y0, int16_t x1, int16_t y1);

// Draw the border of a rectangle at the given location
void drawRect(int16_t x, int16_t y, int16_t width, int16_t height);

// Fill the rectangle
void fillRect(int16_t x, int16_t y, int16_t width, int16_t height);

// Draw the border of a circle
void drawCircle(int16_t x, int16_t y, int16_t radius);

// Fill circle
void fillCircle(int16_t x, int16_t y, int16_t radius);

// Draw an empty triangle i.e. only the outline
void drawTriangle(int16_t x0, int16_t y0, int16_t x1, int16_t y1, int16_t x2, int16_t y2);

// Draw a solid triangle i.e. filled
void fillTriangle(int16_t x0, int16_t y0, int16_t x1, int16_t y1, int16_t x2, int16_t y2);

// Draw a line horizontally
void drawHorizontalLine(int16_t x, int16_t y, int16_t length);

// Draw a lin vertically
void drawVerticalLine(int16_t x, int16_t y, int16_t length);

// Draws a rounded progress bar with the outer dimensions given by width and height. Progress is
// a unsigned byte value between 0 and 100
void drawProgressBar(uint16_t x, uint16_t y, uint16_t width, uint16_t height, uint8_t progress);

// Draw a bitmap in the internal image format
void drawFastImage(int16_t x, int16_t y, int16_t width, int16_t height, const uint8_t *image);

// Draw a XBM
void drawXbm(int16_t x, int16_t y, int16_t width, int16_t height, const uint8_t *xbm);
```

## Text operations

``` C++
// Draws a string at the given location, returns how many chars have been written
uint16_t drawString(int16_t x, int16_t y, const String &text);

// Draws a String with a maximum width at the given location.
// If the given String is wider than the specified width
// The text will be wrapped to the next line at a space or dash
// returns 0 if everything fits on the screen or the numbers of characters in the
// first line if not
uint16_t drawStringMaxWidth(int16_t x, int16_t y, uint16_t maxLineWidth, const String &text);

// Returns the width of the const char* with the current
// font settings
uint16_t getStringWidth(const char* text, uint16_t length, bool utf8 = false);

// Convencience method for the const char version
uint16_t getStringWidth(const String &text);

// Specifies relative to which anchor point
// the text is rendered. Available constants:
// TEXT_ALIGN_LEFT, TEXT_ALIGN_CENTER, TEXT_ALIGN_RIGHT, TEXT_ALIGN_CENTER_BOTH
void setTextAlignment(OLEDDISPLAY_TEXT_ALIGNMENT textAlignment);

// Sets the current font. Available default fonts
// ArialMT_Plain_10, ArialMT_Plain_16, ArialMT_Plain_24
// Or create one with the font tool at http://oleddisplay.squix.ch
void setFont(const uint8_t* fontData);
```

## Ui Library (OLEDDisplayUi)

The Ui Library is used to provide a basic set of user interface elements called `Frames` and `Overlays`. A `Frame` is used to provide
information to the user. The default behaviour is to display a `Frame` for a defined time and than move to the next `Frame`. The library also
provides an `Indicator` element that will be updated accordingly. An `Overlay` on the other hand is a piece of information (e.g. a clock) that
is always displayed at the same position.

```C++
/**
 * Initialise the display
 */
void init();

/**
 * Configure the internal used target FPS
 */
void setTargetFPS(uint8_t fps);

/**
 * Enable automatic transition to next frame after the some time can be configured with
 * `setTimePerFrame` and `setTimePerTransition`.
 */
void enableAutoTransition();

/**
 * Disable automatic transition to next frame.
 */
void disableAutoTransition();

/**
 * Set the direction if the automatic transitioning
 */
void setAutoTransitionForwards();
void setAutoTransitionBackwards();

/**
 *  Set the approx. time a frame is displayed
 */
void setTimePerFrame(uint16_t time);

/**
 * Set the approx. time a transition will take
 */
void setTimePerTransition(uint16_t time);

/**
 * Draw the indicator.
 * This is the default state for all frames if
 * the indicator was hidden on the previous frame
 * it will be slided in.
 */
void enableIndicator();

/**
 * Don't draw the indicator.
 * This will slide out the indicator
 * when transitioning to the next frame.
 */
void disableIndicator();

/**
 * Enable drawing of all indicators.
 */
void enableAllIndicators();

/**
 * Disable drawing of all indicators.
 */
void disableAllIndicators();

/**
 * Set the position of the indicator bar.
 */
void setIndicatorPosition(IndicatorPosition pos);

/**
 * Set the direction of the indicator bar. Defining the order of frames ASCENDING / DESCENDING
 */
void setIndicatorDirection(IndicatorDirection dir);

/**
 * Set the symbol to indicate an active frame in the indicator bar.
 */
void setActiveSymbol(const uint8_t* symbol);

/**
 * Set the symbol to indicate an inactive frame in the indicator bar.
 */
void setInactiveSymbol(const uint8_t* symbol);

/**
 * Configure what animation is used to transition from one frame to another
 */
void setFrameAnimation(AnimationDirection dir);

/**
 * Add frame drawing functions
 */
void setFrames(FrameCallback* frameFunctions, uint8_t frameCount);

/**
 * Add overlays drawing functions that are draw independent of the Frames
 */
void setOverlays(OverlayCallback* overlayFunctions, uint8_t overlayCount);

/**
 * Set the function that will draw each step
 * in the loading animation
 */
void setLoadingDrawFunction(LoadingDrawFunction loadingDrawFunction);

/**
 * Run the loading process
 */
void runLoadingProcess(LoadingStage* stages, uint8_t stagesCount);

// Manual control
void nextFrame();
void previousFrame();

/**
 * Switch without transition to frame `frame`.
 */
void switchToFrame(uint8_t frame);

/**
 * Transition to frame `frame`. When the `frame` number is bigger than the current
 * frame the forward animation will be used, otherwise the backwards animation is used.
 */
void transitionToFrame(uint8_t frame);

// State Info
OLEDDisplayUiState* getUiState();

// This needs to be called in the main loop
// the returned value is the remaining time (in ms)
// you have to draw after drawing to keep the frame budget.
int8_t update();
```

## Example: SSD1306Demo

### Frame 1
![DemoFrame1](https://github.com/squix78/esp8266-oled-ssd1306/raw/master/resources/DemoFrame1.jpg)

This frame shows three things:
 * How to draw an XMB image
 * How to draw static text which is not moved by the frame transition
 * The active/inactive frame indicators

### Frame 2
![DemoFrame2](https://github.com/squix78/esp8266-oled-ssd1306/raw/master/resources/DemoFrame2.jpg)

Currently there are one fontface with three sizes included in the library: Arial 10, 16 and 24. Once the converter is published you will be able to convert any ttf font into the used format.

### Frame 3

![DemoFrame3](https://github.com/squix78/esp8266-oled-ssd1306/raw/master/resources/DemoFrame3.jpg)

This frame demonstrates the text alignment. The coordinates in the frame show relative to which position the texts have been rendered.

### Frame 4

![DemoFrame4](https://github.com/squix78/esp8266-oled-ssd1306/raw/master/resources/DemoFrame4.jpg)

This shows how to use define a maximum width after which the driver automatically wraps a word to the next line. This comes in very handy if you have longer texts to display.

### SPI version

![SPIVersion](https://github.com/neptune2/esp8266-oled-ssd1306/raw/master/resources/SPI_version.jpg)

This shows the code working on the SPI version of the display. See demo code for ESP8266 pins used.

## Selection of projects using this library

 * [QRCode ESP8266](https://github.com/anunpanya/ESP8266_QRcode) (by @anunpanya)
 * [Scan I2C](https://github.com/hallard/Scan-I2C-WiFi) (by @hallard)
 * [ThingPulse Weather Station](https://github.com/ThingPulse/esp8266-weather-station)
 * [Meshtastic](https://www.meshtastic.org/) - an open source GPS communicator mesh radio
 * Yours?
